The First Jenazon Cup
Arbitrary Human+Computer Teams 
in Amazons

Announcement   -   First Call


Prof. Dr. Ingo Althofer
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Friedrich-Schiller-Universitat Jena
07740 Jena  -  Germany

Email:  althofer@mipool.uni-jena.de


Philosophy
There are brain games where top human players and top computer 
programs are approximately equal in playing strength. Currently 
Chess, Scrabble, Backgammon, and perhaps also Amazons belong 
to this class. In these games human-computer combinations may 
be strong teams, when skills of man and machine are brought 
together in a synergetic way. In the chess community special 
events with human+computer teams already have some tradition, 
see 

 www.AdvancedChessLeon.com 

for matches in "Advanced Chess"  or my webpage 

 www.minet.uni-jena.de/www/fakultaet/iam/personen/althofer_e.html

for the "3-Hirn" approach.

Human+Computer in Amazons: The Jenazon Cup
To learn about the potential of human+computer in Amazons, I 
want to run the first Jenazon Cup. In this contest each 
participant is a team with arbitrary members and arbitrary 
decision structure. So, any combination of humans, programs, 
and computers will be accepted and may choose freely its ways 
to achieve decisions. 
For instance, the playing team may consist of

(a) a single human player,   or
(b) a group of human players,   or
(c) a single computer program,   or
(d) a single human assisted by one or several computer programs, or
(e) a group of humans assisted by one or several computer programs, or
(f) three computer programs acting in a majority setting.

An important external limitation is that games in the Jenazon Cup 
will have to be played in realtime via internet.

Each team has to include at least one human, the team leader. This 
person may be involved in the decision processes or only be operating. 
Team leaders are not allowed to participate in more than one team. 
Copies of the same Amazons computer program may be used in more 
than one team. 

All participants shall reveal their team and decision structures 
after the tournament.

Amazons
In the Jenazon Cup, Amazons is played on a 10x10 board with the 
standard starting position for the amazons. An introduction to 
this game may be found for instance on the webpage of Theo Tegos:

     www.cs.ualberta.ca/~tegos/amazons/index.html

Number of Participants in the Jenazon Cup
If seven or less teams participate, a round-robin tournament will 
be played. If the number of participating teams is between eight 
and sixteen, there will be preliminary groups and a final with 
four teams. For each pairing (only) one game is played, with komi 
bidding in the beginning. Details on "komi bidding" are explained 
below. Each participant will have to play at most seven games in 
the whole competition.

At most 16 teams will be admitted. If more than 16 teams apply 
the organizer decides which teams to accept. My intention is to 
make the event as high-calibre as possible. Applicants with good 
explanations why their team should be strong and/or interesting 
have better chances to be admitted. Also, teams with early 
registration have better chances to be accepted.

Komi in the Jenazon Cup
In Amazons the player with the first move has some advantage. It 
is fair to level this by the introduction of "komi".  
A priori the technical meaning of komi is not completely clear. 
Here comes the definition of komi for the Jenazon Cup: 

Let the pairing be player A versus player B, with A making the 
first move, and komi=k, where k is a non-negative integer.
CASE 1: At some moment in the game A is to move but has no more 
        legal move on the board. Then B is declared the winner.
CASE 2: At some moment in the game B is to move but has no more 
        legal move on the board.
   SUBcase 2a: k=0. Then A is declared the winner.
   SUBcase 2b: In this position Player A is able to give a sequence 
               of k successive legal moves for his side. Then A is 
               declared the winner. (In the Jenazon Cup team A has 
               to give the sequence of k successive moves 
               within its thinking time.)
   SUBcase 2c: In this position Player A is not able to give a 
               sequence of k successive legal moves for his side. 
               Then B is declared the winner.

Komi Bidding 
Currently the best komi-value for Amazons is not known. Therefore, 
in the Jenazon Cup in the beginning of each single game komi is 
determined by a bidding procedure.
Alternatingly the two teams call non-negative integers in increasing 
order. The first-mentioned team (in the pairing) has to make a first 
bid ("zero" is explicitely allowed). Finally one of the teams passes 
(or calls a non-increasing integer). This passing team has to play 
the second move, and the komi is defined to be the highest number 
called in this bidding procedure.

Example for the pairing A-B:
A calls 6, B calls 8, A calls 9, B passes. Then komi=9, and A has 
to play the first move.


Winners and Tie-Breaking Rules
In each single game there will be a winner, due to the komi bidding 
rules. Draws are not possible. In a group (preliminary or final) the 
team with the most wins will be the group winner. In case of two or 
more teams with the same number of wins the tie will be broken by a 
coin flipped by the referee. (See also at "price money".)

Date
The Cup will start at the beginning of November 2001. For each pairing 
both teams involved have to agree on a date for the game. This date 
has to be confirmed by the referee. If no agreement is found, the 
referee fixes a date.
The whole event is to be finished well before Christmas 2001.

Thinking time will be 90 minutes per team for the whole game in 
preliminary rounds, and 120 minutes in the finals. A team has to 
arrange all internal decisions during its thinking time. Clocks will 
be run by the internet server.

Venue of Play
Games are to be played on a game server in the internet, probably 
on GGS. For information on GGS, see

     www.neci.nj.nec.com/homepages/mic/ggsa/ggsa.html

Registration
Registration is possible from now on, at the Email address   
althofer@mipool.uni-jena.de   . Teams from all over the world are 
invited. Only human team leaders are allowed to register. Registration 
deadline is 30 September, 2001. Only under exceptional circumstances 
later registrations will be accepted. Applicants will be informed 
immediately after registration and again early in October 2001.
The pairings for the (preliminary) group(s) will be made when all 
participants are known.

Starting Fee
There is no starting fee. Application and participation are free.

Price Money
One thousand Euro are given to the winning team.
In case of disputes and reclamation the referee is the only authority. 
Legal actions are excluded (in German language: "Der Rechtsweg ist 
ausgeschlossen.").

In case of a tie-break situation the price money will be split in 
equal parts. If there is a tie in a preliminary group, this group 
winner (determined by coin flip) will have to share its eventual 
price money with the tie-partners.
An extreme example: In a preliminary group the teams A1, A2, A3 
share the first place, and A1 wins the tie. In the final A1 again 
shares the win with two other teams. Then each of the teams A1, 
A2, and A3 get 111 Euro (= 1/3 * 1/3 * 1000).

Referee
This is me, Ingo Althofer. Independent volunteers are invited to 
support; please, offer me your help.
After each game both parties independently have to send a file with 
the komi bidding, the moves and the result to the referee.

Proposals and questions are welcome to: althofer@mipool.uni-jena.de


Looking forward to an intriguing Jenazon Cup with many ideas on 
human+computer teams,    Ingo Althofer.

PS: Please, send your Email always to althofer@mipool.uni-jena.de 
even if you sometimes get my replies from other accounts. Please, 
spread the announcement. This announcement will also be sent to 
the ICGA Journal for publication;
and you will find it (soon) on my webpage  
www.minet.uni-jena.de/www/fakultaet/iam/personen/althofer_e.html
A second Jenazon Cup is intended for November 2002.
